TL;DR The main task of the competition is to de-poison (unlearn) a RetinaNet model for streak detection in optical images of the night sky. Participants are provided with 1) a poisoned RetinaNet model, 2) examples of poisoned images from the training set, 3) a set of test images for which predictions from the de-poisoned model should be provided, and 4) Jupyter notebooks with sample solutions. Description Introduction to the task Machine learning (ML) is rapidly improving our ability to detect faint streaks in telescopic images of the night sky (see the image on the right \[1\]) - one of the key challenges in tracking the growing amount of space debris in Earth’s orbit. Sybilla Technologies and KP Labs recently launched a new activity funded by ESA to improve the detection accuracy of space debris streaks in optical images using advanced ML methods. However, for operational deployment, the ML-based detection models must be not only accurate, but also secure against unreliable or manipulated data and easy to maintain. Our competition, organized in cooperation with the Centre for Credible AI, is an opportunity to directly contribute to these aspects - helping ensure that such models meet the high standards required for operational use. The title of the competition "Neural Debris Removal" is a word play combining space debris detection, neural networks, and removal of unwanted behaviours from them. It is also a name of the biological process where immune cells like microglia clear cellular waste from the brain \[2\]. This is a good analogy to what we try to achieve for neural networks in our task, which is the removal of unwanted, biased, incorrect, or manipulated behaviour of models – in the AI literature referred to as backdoor removal, adversarial neuron pruning, fine-pruning, adversarial unlearning, machine unlearning, purification, or de-poisoning. This task is related to the three threats listed in our Catalogue of Security Risks for AI Applications in Space \[3\], i.e., data poisoning, adversarial samples, and trojan horse attacks. We trained one clean (hidden from participants) and one poisoned (shared with participants) RetinaNet model for streak detection in 16-bit grayscale images. Your task is to design effective methods for updating the poisoned model weights based on the provided set of poisoned examples. The updated (de-poisoned) model should produce detections as close as possible to the original clean model (see the Evaluation metric section). Wider project context ESA's European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) initiated a project to outline a clear direction for data strategy and AI implementation in mission operations. This initiative led to the creation of the DataX \[4\] strategy, developed to improve the scalability of advanced analytics applications, including AI systems and to increase the value of data within the organization. One of the key elements of developing an AI system is the security of AI applications addressed within the Assurance for Space Domain AI Applications project (https://assurance-ai.space-codev.org/) and its Catalogue of Security Risks for AI Applications in Space \[3\]. The Secure Your AI series of competitions is a follow-up of this project. You can check the previous competitions here: https://assurance-ai.space-codev.org/competitions/. Introductory video by Sybilla Technologies Data The generation of synthetic images of the night sky and streaks with their corresponding labels was enabled through the support of the ESA SYNDAQ project (Synthetic Data Generation & Qualification) carried out by Solenix (prime), Telespazio, and Fondazione Bruno Kessler. All the images used for training and testing are 1024x1024 16-bit grayscale PNG files. More details in the Data tab. Code The competition offers notebooks to generate sample submissions directly at Kaggle. Baselines ✅ Simple fine-tuning baseline The baseline de-poisoned model is generated by a simple fine-tuning of the poisoned model using the public unlearn set with empty annotations. It runs for 20 epochs using learning rate of 0.0001 and batch size of 4. The baseline optimization method solution is available on the competition’s leaderboard. The code of the method is available in the Code tab. Poisoned model reference As a reference, we consider predictions from the poisoned model (notebook). Empty prediction reference As a reference, we consider empty prediction file (notebook). Evaluation metric 📈 Submissions are evaluated using our custom Mean Asymmetric Confidence-Aware Detection Distance (maCADD) between the predictions from the de-poisoned model provided by a participant and the clean model. Lower distance is better and the perfect score is 0. Symmetric CADD A baseline symmetric CADD measures a sum of confidence differences between Hungarian matched detections from the clean and de-poisoned models. Unmatched detections (both false positive and negative) are additionally penalized by adding their confidences to the sum: where c^clean and c^de-pois are detection confidences from the clean and de-poisoned models, respectively. M is the set of matched detection pairs, FN are unmatched clean detections, and FP are unmatched de-poisoned detections that do not overlap with any clean detection. Asymmetric CADD (aCADD) The main goal of aCADD is to promote solutions with stronger unlearning in the correct direction, even if they are further from the original clean model's confidence. To achieve this, aCADD uses different penalty factors depending on the sign of the confidence difference in relation to the ground truth object class (clean or poisoned streak). For example, if the sign of the difference (c^clean - c^de-pois) is positive for the poisoned objects – which means that the de-poisoning decreases the detection confidence for poisoned objects below the clean model's confidence (in the correct unlearning direction) – the penalty is A times lower than for the negative sign. The analogous rule works for the A times lower penalty for the negative difference for clean streaks. We use A = 10 in our competition to represent the order of magnitude lower penalty for correct unlearning direction. where S is the set of matched detection pairs where the de-poisoned model has confidences lower/higher than the clean model for clean/poisoned objects, respectively (correct unlearning direction). Analogously, P is the set of matched detection pairs where the de-poisoned model has confidence higher/lower than the clean model for clean/poisoned objects, respectively (incorrect unlearning direction). Mean asymmetric CADD (maCADD) To compute aCCAD, we need to define a minimal Intersection-over-Union (IoU) threshold for matching detections. maCADD computes a series of aCCAD\_t values across a set of IoU thresholds, i.e., t ∈ T = {0.2, 0.3, …, 0.9}. The final score is the normalized weighted mean aCCAD\_t over IoU thresholds, using each IoU threshold as its weight. Important notes! If there are multiple matching de-poisoned detections for the same clean detection (IoU ≥ t), only the one with the highest IoU is considered and the rest is counted as FPs. the clean model detections contain only outputs with confidence > 0.2 Submission file 📁 The submission file must contain one row per each test image. Each row must have two columns: image\_id – identifier of the test image (0, 1, 2, 3, …, 1999) prediction\_string - space-delimited list representing bounding boxes of all the detected objects in the image. Each detection is encoded as a list of 5 numeric values: confidence x y width height, for example 0.5 0 0 100 100. Every consecutive detection extends the list with additional 5 values. For example, 0.5 0 0 100 100 0.75 200 200 50 50 means two detections: 1) confidence=0.5, x=0, y=0, width=100, height=100 | 2) confidence=0.75, x=200, y=200, width=50, height=50. Use a whitespace string " " for no detection - Kaggle does not support empty strings and treat them as null values. confidence – detection confidence score (float between 0 and 1) x – x-coordinate of the top-left corner (0-indexed, from the left edge) y – y-coordinate of the top-left corner (0-indexed, from the top edge) width – width of the bounding box (in pixels) height – height of the bounding box (in pixels) The submission file should be in the CSV format. It should contain a header and have the following format: image\_id prediction\_string 0 0.5 0 0 100 100 1 2 0.6 0 0 100 100 0.75 200 200 50 50 3 0.95 100 100 50 50 … … 1999 0.6 50 50 100 100 See the notebook with sample submission to check how to create the file Prizes Monetary prizes sponsored by Sybilla Technologies for the top 3 teams: 🥇500 USD 🥈300 USD 🥉200 USD Please check the Rules tab for further details about eligibility and criteria for the monetary prizes. Winners will be officially announced during the 2nd Workshop on Explainable AI for Space (EASi) at the IJCAI-ECAI 2026 conference (15-17 August 2026). The workshop offers a special extended deadline of 1st June 2026 for paper submissions related to the competition. All participants are welcome to submit short or full papers on their solutions to the 2nd Workshop on Machine Unlearning and Privacy Preservation (WIPE-OUT 2) at the ECML PKDD 2026 conference (7 September 2026). Submission deadline: 5 June 2026. Winner(s) will be invited as co-authors of a separate joint paper summarizing the competition.